For other uses, see Independence (disambiguation).Thirteen  British  colonies on the east coast of North America  issued a 
Declaration of Independence  in 1776Chile, one of several Spanish  colonies in South America, issued a Declaration of independence 
 in 1818Independence  is a condition of a nation, country, or state  in which its residents and population, or some portion thereof,
exercise self-government, and usually sovereignty, over the territory. The opposite of independence is a dependent territory.
Independence does not necessarily mean freedom.[clarification needed]



DEFINITION OF INDEPENDENCE
Whether the attainment of independence is different from revolution  has long been contested, and has often been debated over the
question of violence  as a legitimate  means to achieving sovereignty.[1]  While some revolutions seek and achieve national
independence, others aim only to redistribute power — with or without an element of emancipation, such as in democratization  — 
within  a state, which as such may remain unaltered. Nation-states have been granted independence without any revolutionary acts.[

citation needed]  The Russian October Revolution, for example, was not intended to seek national independence (though it merely
transformed government for much of the former Russian Empire, it did result in independence for Poland, Finland, Lithuania, Latvia 
 and Estonia). However, the American Revolutionary War  was intended to achieve independence from the beginning. Causes for a
country or province wishing to seek independence are many. The means can extend from peaceful demonstrations, like in the case of
the Indian independence movement, to a violent civil war.

DISTINCTION BETWEEN INDEPENDENCE AND AUTONOMY
Autonomy  refers to a kind of independence which has been granted by an overseeing authority  that itself still retains ultimate
authority over that territory (see Devolution). A protectorate  refers to an autonomous region that depends upon a larger
government for its protection as an autonomous region.

DECLARATIONS OF INDEPENDENCE
Sometimes, a state wishing to achieve independence from a dominating power will issue a declaration of independence; the earliest
surviving example is Scotland's Declaration of Arbroath  in 1320, with the most recent example being Azawad's declaration of
independence in 2012. Declaring independence and attaining it however, are quite different. A well-known successful example is the
 U.S. Declaration of Independence  issued in 1776. The dates of established independence (or, less commonly, the commencement of
revolution), are typically celebrated as a national holiday  known as an independence day.

HISTORICAL OVERVIEW
Historically, there have been three major periods of declaring independence:

 * from the 1770s, beginning with the American Revolutionary War  through the 1830s, when the last royalist bastions fell at the
   close of the Spanish American wars of independence;
 * the immediate aftermath of the First World War  following the breakup of the Ottoman  and Austro-Hungarian  empires;
 * and 1945 to 1979, when seventy newly independent states emerged from the European colonial empires.[2]

CONTINENTS
ContinentNo.Oldest CountryNewest CountryAfrica54Egypt  (3000 BC)[original research?]South Sudan  (2011)Americas35United States  (
1776)[b]Saint Kitts and Nevis  (1983)[c]Asia44[d]China  (1800 BC)[e][original research?]East Timor  (2002)Europe50[d]San Marino 
(301)Montenegro  (2006)
Kosovo  (2008)[g][3]Oceania14Australia  (1901)Palau  (1994)[h]Antarctica8de facto  condominium  internationalNOTES
 1. ^  Unilateral recognition  of independence by the United Kingdom  but continued British military occupation.
 2. ^  Independence from the Kingdom of Great Britain  declared.
 3. ^  Independence from the United Kingdom.
 4. ^ a  b  Part of Transcaucasian Region, at the crossroads of Europe and Asia. Physiographically, Armenia falls entirely in 
    Western Asia, while Georgia and Azerbaijan are mostly in Asia with small portions north of the Caucasus Mountains  divide in
    Europe.
 5. ^  The Xia dynasty (Chinese: 夏朝; pinyin: Xià Cháo; Wade–Giles: Hsia-Ch'ao; IPA: [ɕiâ tʂʰɑ̌ʊ̯]; c. 2070 – c. 1600 BC) is the
    first dynasty in traditional Chinese history.
 6. ^  Kingdom of the Franks  becomes the first Christian State after the fall of the Western Roman Empire.
 7. ^  Partially recognized de facto  self-governing entity. It is recognised by 108  UN members the Cook Islands, Niue  and 
    Taiwan. Claimed by Serbia  as the Autonomous Province of Kosovo and Metohija under UN administration.
 8. ^  An independent state in free association  with the United States.

SEE ALSO
 * Independence constitution
 * Independence referendum
 * List of countries by Independence Day
 * List of sovereign states by date of formation
 * Special Committee on Decolonization
 * Wars of independence
 * Unilateral declaration of independence
 * United Nations list of Non-Self-Governing Territories

REFERENCES
 1. ^  Benjamin, Walter  (1996) [1921]. Walter Benjamin: Selected Writings, Volume 1: 1913–1926. Cambridge: Harvard University
    Press. 236–252. ISBN0-674-94585-9.
 2. ^  David Armitage, The Declaration of Independence in World Context, Organization of American Historians, Magazine of History,
    Volume 18, Issue 3, Pp. 61–66 (2004)
 3. ^  "Kosovo"  (PDF). Archived from the original  (PDF)  on 2008-02-16. Retrieved 30 July  2015.

ARTICLE NOTE
The dates of independence, as they have been ported into many articles from the CIA World Factbook  are defined as follows:

For most countries, [the given date is that] when sovereignty  was achieved ... For the other countries, the date given may not
represent "independence" in the strict sense, but rather some significant nationhood event such as the traditional founding date
or the date of unification, federation, confederation, establishment, or fundamental change in the form of government, such as 
state succession.Wikiquote has quotations related to: Independence